add long article and short reference for join optimization (#17082)
MaterializeInc/materialize: doc/user/content/ops/optimization.md

Building an efficient index depends on the clauses used in your queries, as well as your expected access patterns. Use the following as a guide:

* [DEFAULT](#default)
* [WHERE](#where)
* [JOIN](#join)

`GROUP BY`, `ORDER BY` and `LIMIT` clauses currently do not benefit from an index.

### Default

Create a default index when there is no particular `WHERE` or `JOIN` clause that would fit the above cases. This can still speed up your query by reading the input from memory.

Clause                                               | Index                               |
-----------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|
`SELECT x, y FROM obj_name`                          | `CREATE DEFAULT INDEX ON obj_name;` |

> 

Author: Done!

### `JOIN`

In general, you can improve the performance of your joins by creating indexes on the columns being joined. This comes at the cost of additional memory usage. Fortunately, Materialize can reuse these indexes for different queries, which means **for multiple queries, indexes are a fixed upfront cost with memory savings for each new query.**

Let's create a few tables to work through examples.

```sql
CREATE TABLE teachers (id INT, name TEXT);
CREATE TABLE sections (id INT, teacher_id INT, course_id INT, schedule TEXT);
CREATE TABLE courses (id INT, name TEXT);
```

#### Joining Two Collections

Here is an example where we join a collection `teachers` to a collection `sections` to see the name of the teacher, schedule, and course ID for a specific section of a course.

```sql
SELECT
    t.name,
    s.schedule,
    s.course_id
FROM teachers t
INNER JOIN sections s ON t.id = s.teacher_id;
```

We can optimize this query by creating an index for each column being joined.

```sql
CREATE INDEX pk_teachers ON teachers (id);
CREATE INDEX sections_fk_teachers ON sections (teacher_id);
```

> 

Reviewer: This section is not complete. If you run look at the plan without and then with the indexes it's the same - sans reading the data from persist. 

```
materialize=> EXPLAIN SELECT
    t.name,
    s.schedule,
    s.course_id
FROM teachers t
INNER JOIN sections s ON t.id = s.teacher_id;
               Optimized Plan
---------------------------------------------
 Explained Query:                           +
   Project (#1, #4, #3)                     +
     Join on=(#0 = #2) type=differential    +
       ArrangeBy keys=[[#0]]                +
         Filter (#0) IS NOT NULL            +
           Get materialize.public.teachers  +
       ArrangeBy keys=[[#0]]                +
         Project (#1..=#3)                  +
           Filter (#1) IS NOT NULL          +
             Get materialize.public.sections+
                                            +
 Source materialize.public.teachers         +
   filter=((#0) IS NOT NULL)                +
 Source materialize.public.sections         +
   filter=((#1) IS NOT NULL)                +

(1 row)

materialize=> CREATE INDEX pk_teachers ON teachers (id);
CREATE INDEX sections_fk_teachers ON sections (teacher_id);
CREATE INDEX
CREATE INDEX
materialize=> EXPLAIN SELECT
    t.name,
    s.schedule,
    s.course_id
FROM teachers t
INNER JOIN sections s ON t.id = s.teacher_id;
               Optimized Plan
---------------------------------------------
 Explained Query:                           +
   Project (#1, #5, #4)                     +
     Filter (#0) IS NOT NULL                +
       Join on=(#0 = #3) type=differential  +
         ArrangeBy keys=[[#0]]              +
           Get materialize.public.teachers  +
         ArrangeBy keys=[[#1]]              +
           Get materialize.public.sections  +
                                            +
 Used Indexes:                              +
   - materialize.public.pk_teachers         +
   - materialize.public.sections_fk_teachers+
```

That is because the index performs the first half of arranging the data. The benefit comes when you have a second view that also joins teachers or sections and can reuse the data in memory. We need to expand on that here.

#### Joins with Filters

If your query filters one or more of the join inputs by a literal equality (e.g., `WHERE t.name = 'Escalante'`), place one of those input collections first in the `FROM` clause. In particular, this can speed up [ad hoc `SELECT` queries](/sql/select/#ad-hoc-queries) by accessing collections using index lookups rather than full scans.

#### Optimize Multi-Way Joins with Delta Joins

> Materialize has access to a join execution strategy we call `DeltaQuery`, a.k.a. **delta joins**, that aggressively re-uses indexes and maintains **_zero_** intermediate results. Materialize considers this plan only if all the necessary indexes already exist, in which case the **_additional_** memory cost of the join is **zero**. This is typically possible when you **index all the join keys**.
> 
> From the previous example, suppose we want to add the name of the course rather than just the course ID. We will create a view `course_schedule` to reflect this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Materialize has access to a join execution strategy we call `DeltaQuery`, a.k.a. **delta joins**, that aggressively re-uses indexes and maintains **_zero_** intermediate results. Materialize considers this plan only if all the necessary indexes already exist, in which case the **_additional_** memory cost of the join is **zero**. This is typically possible when you **index all the join keys**.

From the previous example, add the name of the course rather than just the course ID reflected in a new view `course_schedule`:
```

                                                 +
 Used Indexes:                                   +
   - materialize.public.t1_y                     +
   - materialize.public.t2_x                     +
   - materialize.public.t2_w                     +
   - materialize.public.t3_z                     +
```
Delta joins have the advantage of using negligible additional memory outside the explicitly created indexes on the inputs. For more details, see [Delta Joins and Late Materialization](/overview/delta-joins).

If your query filters one or more of the join inputs by a literal equality (e.g., `t1.y = 42`), place one of those inputs first in the `FROM` clause. In particular, this can speed up [ad hoc `SELECT` queries](/sql/select/#ad-hoc-queries) by accessing inputs using index lookups, rather than full scans.

#### Further Optimize with Late Materialization

> Even with delta joins, Materialize can potentially maintain much more data in memory than is needed. You can further optimize your multi-way joins with late materialization using this recipe:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Materialize can further optimize memory usage - using a pattern known as late materialization - when joining relations containing primary and foreign key constraints.

```

We should try and phrase things positiviely. DeltaQueryies don't maintain much more data in memory than is needed but instead we can futher optimize certain patterns 😄
